---
layout: post
title: "Masters of Outlines"
published: true
categories: think.stack
---

There are outlines. There are simple bullet-point lists (technically,
one-level outlines). There are proper two-level outlines, the first to
distinguish logical relation between items, and perhaps the mostl widely
used. Count a man happy if he spent his days being able to distinguish
something from its parts. Then there are three-level outlines. Almost
anything could be made to fit within such structure, the first to
acknowledges that parts, while integrating larger units, might also be
composed of parts. Picking some examples at random, a three-level
structure has been sufficient to hold the universal history of the Nahua
people of pre-Columbian Mexico, comprising their customs, religious
beliefs, political institutions and natural history;[^1] the entirety
of human knowledge in the form of the *Propædia*, the first volume of
the 15th Edition of the *Encyclopædia Britannica*,[^2] Spinoza's
*Ethics*, which sought to demonstrate through the geometrical method the
truth about God, nature, mankind and civic society.[^3] Contrary to
popular opinion, the Holy Spirit was not particularly inclined to speak
by means of cumbersome paratexts: the Hebrew and Babylonian Talmud were
organized in a one-level structure, composed of sections. Eusebius the
early Biblical scholars divided the Gospels in thematic sections, but
the current chapter strcuture was only created in 13th-century Paris by
Hugh of Saint-Cher. Compared to these age-old traditions, the numbering
of versicles is a recent fad---the mid-16th-century--- and it's hard to
known whether it will stick---at least two contemporary editions do
without them. The *Summa Theologica* shows that a four-level structure
can already contain the whole of Medieval Theology and Philosophy,
detailed objections to it, and even more detailed refutations of those
objections.[^4] The four-level structure also survives in old-school,
lenghty doctoral dissertations ---a sign of hubris or mere boredom. To
write a five-level outline you must be either obsessive compulsive, a
German theologian or the author of a poorly-edited science textbook. I
can't recall ever encountering a six-level structure or outline. Playing
with the automated indented-list function in my word processor, the
deepest I was able to reach without breathing was a dizzying ninth
level. After the seventh level, the standard Harvard Outline notation
starts to repeat, as in the further reaches of Pi.[^5] These are all
outlines. Even absurdly cumbersome outlines. But there's outlines and
there's Tibetan outlines, sa-bcad (ས་བཅད).

(To be continued...)

[^1]: Fray Bernardino de Sahagún's *Florentine Codex*, *ca*. 1580,
    divided in 12 Books, Chapters and Parragraphs.

[^2]: The *Outline of Knowledge*, the core of the *Propædia* created by
    the Thomist philosopher Mortimer J. Adler, organizes the whole
    content of the 15th Edition in 10 Parts, 41 Divisions and 167
    Sections.

[^3]: As everyone knows, Spinoza follows Euclid's *more geometrico*. It
    could be argued, however, that Definitions, Axioms and Propositions
    cannot belong to the same level, in so far as each one presuposes
    and is founded on the previous one, and also that a Proof cannot
    stand in the same structural level as that which it is a proof of
    (*i.e.* a Proposition). Fortunately, however, modern editions of the
    *Ethics* have stuck to a manageable three-level structurte.

[^4]: The *Summa* is divided in Parts, Questions, Articles, Objections
    and Responses. While Objections and Responses tend to be placed on
    the same level, it makes more sense that Thomas's *Respondeo* be
    organized one level deeper that the *adversus*.

[^5]: A malevolent reader of Borges would retort than in fact, the whole
    of human knowledge, the universe, God and everything that can be
    named could be organized in the simple two-level alphabetic
    structure of an infinite dictionary.
